---
title: Skill Trees
date: 2021-01-13T11:27
tags: [games, game-desgin, skill-trees, skills, gamemakers-toolkit, gmtk]
---

I was just watching/listening to one of GMTK's videos on skill trees. He was
discussing the styles of skill trees and their pros and cons. A lot of the cons
involved the mundaness. Examples being getting dealt out some new skill just for
progressing, grinding to improve a skill, or just upgrading your health in a
skill tree entry.
The pros involved making the player work for upgrades. His example was in FarCry
he wanted a new holster. It required him to do some thinking by looking at what
pelt he needed, finding that animals breeding ground, and getting the required
materials.

While watching this, I thought about skills in terms of real life. We work hard
to obtain new skills. They take time & effort and are very much incremental. I
wonder what a skill tree system would look like if you were only able to pick a
handful of skills that you wanted to learn. When you pick a skill, you would
first have a clumsy form of the skill but as you kept using it then you would
increase in competency. For example, say climbing was a skill that was useful
but not required in a game. If you picked it then you would first start climbing
without much proficiency -- it could be limited by height and stamina -- but as
you did it more you start to be able to climb to greater heights and use less
stamina.
On top of that, skills could be interconnected. If I gained more stamina by
climbing then this could be _transferred_ into something that also required
stamina, running for example.

This system would mean that players would have to make choices in which skills
they want to spend time putting work into. They would get that intrinsic
motivation of improving at something as the skills improve over time.
